Well we've just started on our sculpting.
Let's go ahead and keep working on this.
I think I'm going to work on the back of the legs here.
One of the things I feel like I need to do is get the calves here kind of inserting into the muscles
at the back of the leg here.
So I'm going to use the clay strips brush here.
Now one thing I need to mention I had said earlier that you can use the number keys on your keyboard
as a substitute for the numbers on the number pad.
If you didn't have a number pad if you were say working on a laptop and didn't have a number pad and
that works pretty well.
However when you begin sculpting the numbers on the keyboard become kind of useful.
So what I've done is I've come over here to the user preferences and I've turned off emulate numpad
so that when I'm out here in sculped mode I can hit the one key two key three key and you can see that
it's changing the sculped brush.
Now these correspond to one two three four five and on up and then you begin with the shift.
One two three four five etc..
So for me right now I'm using the three key for the clay brush the six key for the Flaten shift 2 for
the pinch and shift four for the sculped draw.
I just kind of have memorized those because I use them a lot and that really becomes very important
as you're working and you're concentrating and you don't want to have to constantly come over here and
select something out of the menu.
So just wanted to mention that about the number keys on the keyboard.
Some of the work just a little bit more on the muscles of the back of the leg.
These muscles tend to come down to about right here and over lap on the sides and then
the calves kind of insert up into these so I'm going to try and get something like that it's kind of
difficult right now with the subdivisions being so low.
But it's good to try and get as much as you can done at low resolution like this before you move on
to the details.
So I'll just try and see what I can get.
All right.
I feel like I've kind of hinted at that joint between those two muscles.
Another prominent muscle is the one along the back here.
There is kind of a ridge along either side of the spine that comes down from the base of the head down
to the base of the spine here.
So going to see if I can hint at that here.
Just going to begin right up here at the base of the skull and work my way down.
Right down to here let's say
something like that.
And also there's a muscle right along the side here.
What many people call the obliques that run kind of from the back of the rib cage down to the front
to the pelvis.
So work on that too.
I'm going to press the H key and click and drag to hide this arm and let's move in here and I'll begin
right up in here.
And kind of bring it down like that.
Kind of needs to go in the front here.
So it's kind of an S-curve almost
and to bring that hand back.
All we have to do is just press alt H.
Now will bring that back.
Now I think the front of the shins Here are a little bit too thick.
I'm going to come in here and use the grab tool to move these back just a bit.
So I'll use this grab brush and maybe increase the size of my brush here with the F key.
And the strength is pretty high I'm going to bring this down some and I'll just begin clicking and moving
these back just a hair very gently I have a tendency to use the grab brush a little too strong so I'm
going to try my best here to ease back a bit.
There we go.
And that gives us a nice kind of an S curve to the leg here with the upper leg kind of curving out and
then curving back for the lower leg.
Now there are a couple of other landmarks that we should go ahead and add in here.
I'd like to go ahead and begin with the Pecks here in the chest area and also I think we should draw
in the clavicle.
So first of all let's go ahead and start working on the pecs.
These are usually kind of a teardrop shape that come down an insert into the area underneath the arms
here.
So I'm going to start by just sketching these out.
Let's go over to our character images view and see how we're doing here.
So it looks like I can add a little more form up here near the top like that and maybe bring that around
like that.
Now for the clavicle I'm going to come back to the default view again and let's draw the clavicle.
I think I'll hide the head for this.
So I'll press the H key and click and drag right here to draw this.
I'll go ahead and use this sculpt draw brush that should give me a little bit more definition.
So I'll just start here and kind of draw it out like that an S-curve see how that's going to work.
Yeah something like that.
I'll go ahead and press alt H and bring the head back and maybe I'll add a bit of volume to the shoulders
here just so we can begin to block that out too.
So to do that.
What I'd like to do is draw out a mask kind of mask off the area that will be the shoulder muscles and
then invert that mask to protect the rest of the model.
So what I mean by that is let's go to mask here and with this on I can dry out an area that's going
to represent that shoulder muscles so I can just kind of paint right on here.
Where I think that shoulder muscle is going to be
say it's going to be something like that to invert that mask.
We can come down here to the hide mask menu and we can choose invert mask or we can use control eye.
So I'm just going to click this and now you can see that the mask has been applied to everything else.
If I tried to sculpt Here I'll come to the clay brush and try to sculpt here.
Wouldn't do it.
But I can come up here.
And I can sculpt here and it will do it here so I can sculpt However I like here and protect the rest
of the model so I'll just add some form here to the shoulders.
And go now we're getting something there to get rid of the mask we can come back down here to hide mask.
We can choose clear mask or old in.
There we go.
So this kind of process is what I'll be using for quite a bit of the larger muscle groups kind of masking
off portions and then sculpting that area.
So as another example here if I come back here to the back of the character what I'd like to do is mask
off the area for the scapula.
So I'll come over here to the mask reduce the brush size just a bit and I'm going to begin drawing right
back here.
Come down about like this loop around down here.
And come back up to fit around that muscle there.
So we get something that looks a little like this.
So that'll be our scapula right there.
Now I can press control.
I then go back to the clay strips brush and do a little bit of sculpting in here to kind of hint at
that structure on the back.
Now this part should be kind of flat.
As you look at it from the side.
So I will use my flattened brush here.
I'm going to go over to the Flaten and try this flatten that out a bit.
So that's generally the way I'll be working masking out a structure and then building it out.
All right.
So we're getting there little by little.